okay good morning everyone uh I don't
have any updates about the final project
or weekly reports everything going well
any tips or tricks I can help you
with no okay so uh we're going to dive
back in to lecture material uh in a
moment but before we do um one of the
many perks of being a professor is every
once in a while I get to embarrass my
students today is one of those days your
uh student Pier here cam Bowski uh I
think has discovered something pretty
interesting in the last few days he
pulled an all nighter last night trying
to get this submitted to a
conference I went to bed at midnight
went to bed at midnight not an all
nighter okay not quite we don't have
time to talk about this figure I think
it's super cool it's not about robotics
but it's related to many of the things
we've talked about in this class if
you're interested talk to cam well done
cam
okay all
right back to robotics all right we are
uh working through our short segment on
uh collective intelligence in robotics
as in nature there are many tasks uh
that confront organisms that are
difficult or impossible for an
individual to do on their own but if
they can figure out how to coordinate
and in some cases explicitly communicate
they're able to do something together
that's beyond the ability of any one of
them so as roboticists that leaves us
with the research question how how
exactly do you design or in our case
evolve autonomous machines to
autonomously coordinate their actions to
do something that's beyond the ability
of any one of them we saw arguably where
these ideas started to take root back in
the 1980s when we looked at some of the
work from Craig Reynolds and his Boyd's
uh algorithm where there is no one
leader we have a large number of
independent
agents and they are uh active they
working collectively by running
basically the same program all of them
are running the same program which is a
combination of these three functions
which continuously updates the
operations uh of each individual we
ended last time by looking at uh another
study from about 10 years later uh and
this is arguably an evolution robotics
experiment but again pre physics engine
era no real physics engine here we have
a very very simple two-dimensional plane
that's been uh curved so that the two
long ends touch and then that tube is
curved so that the two ends of the tube
connect so we have a toroid and we have
four virtual lions that are going to be
running around the surface of this
toroid and a gazelle that is going to be
trying to escape from them on this
infinite toid none of the five can fall
off because a toid has no edges so far
so
good uh as usual we're going to see an
evolutionary algorithm that's going to
evolve behaviors for the four lions and
you can probably guess what the fitness
function is going to be the fitness
function is going to reward for minimal
distance between any one of the Lions
and the gazelle at the end of the
simulation that's a single floating
Point number a distance between the
closest Lion and the gazelle and that
number that Fitness is not assigned to
any one lion that Fitness value is going
to be assigned to all four Lions even
those lions that were nowhere near the
gazelle when the the closest lion
actually did bring down the gazelle so
this is something we haven't seen so far
before in all of this course so far
we've seen selection acting on
individuals selection being darwinian
selection what we're going to see in
this word today is a form of group
selection where evolution is favoring or
not favoring not an individual but a
group this is a very controversial
subject in evolutionary bi biology might
have come up in a biology class you've
taken why is group selection such a
controversial
topic any
ideas that's the
LEL in reality good question so is that
the level that selection works on or is
the group the appropriate Target of
selection it seems obvious well obvious
to many of us when you hear about
darwinian Evolution it makes sense
things that I do well or poorly affects
whether or not I survive long enough to
actually reproduce Offspring and
assuming those individuals my Offspring
inherit my pros and cons they're likely
to to uh inherit the same kind of
selection pressures so it seems obvious
but what exactly is it about me I I
don't act alone I have brothers and
sisters and cousins and parents and
grandparents and friends and foes and so
on which also
influence whether or not I live long
enough and survive long enough to
produce Offspring so is it just me
that's the target of selection is it
myself and my siblings myself and my
siblings and my cousins myself my
siblings my cousins my friends
everybody else what exactly is the
target of
selection you can also look inward is it
all of me that is the target of
selection arguably for many of us
there's just one cell in our body that
actually goes on to become our Offspring
the rest is temporary so is all of this
the target of the selection or is it
just our gametes where exactly does the
pressure of dar wian selection uh come
to bear it's a controversial topic it's
beyond the scope uh of this class but
again for those of you that are
interested in the biological aspects of
what we're talking about it's
interesting to read up on group
selection one particular form of group
selection that is not so controversial
is kin
selection if my siblings do not have
children but they help me raise my
child my siblings benefit from an
evolutionary point of view even though
they're not producing Offspring feels
like a bit of a catch 22 if you don't
produce Offspring how are you possibly
benefiting from an evolutionary point of
view absolutely right so a sibling that
doesn't have offspring of their own but
helps raise the The Offspring of their
sibl siblings benefits evolutionarily
because they're helping half of their
genes for most species it's half of
their genes propagate into the Next
Generation so not so controversial but
again brings us back to the Target of
selection so maybe the sibling wasn't
actually the target of selection to
begin with maybe it's just the genes
that make up the sibling that is
actually the target of selection doesn't
matter whether I survive or my siblings
survive as long as our genes
collectively survive so maybe we
shouldn't be thinking about the
individual as the target of selection we
should be thinking about genes as the
target of selection gets gets tricky
sometimes this idea of genes actually
being the real targets of selection and
not individuals is known as the selfish
Gene
hypothesis you've probably heard of this
before Richard Dawkins was the
originator of this idea also very
controversial
today what we're going to look at or
what we've been looking at in this
course so far is sort of the traditional
view of selection the individual
organism or the individual robot
produces offspring in proportion to how
well it survives and does whatever it is
we want it to do what we're going to be
looking at today is kid selection as
you're going to see in a moment these
Lions share genetic material and they
all benefit collectively or fail fa to
benefit collectively not based on how
well any one individual in the in the
group does but how well they do together
in this case and bringing down the
gazelle so far so good okay all right so
uh let's talk a little bit now about the
evolutionary side of this as I just
mentioned we're going to evolve behavior
for the pride of lions we are not going
to be evolving uh behavior for the
gazelle we're going to fix the behavior
behavior of the gazelle one more uh
biology uh side note I want to make is
if we were evolving the behavior of the
gazelle we'd be considering
co-evolution obviously as Predators
evolve to be better at what they're
supposed to be doing the general fitness
of all of the prey starts to go down the
chance of producing Offspring becomes
less for the prey there is strong
selection pressure acting on the prey to
evolve uh Escape behaviors of the
Predators if they do if the praise start
to increase in Fitness they get better
and better at avoiding the Predators
what happens to the general fitness of
the Predator
population down this this is
co-evolution right your Fitness you as
an individual of a group is no longer
dependent on just what you or your group
does but now also on what other groups
are doing you might remember back to the
beginning of the course when we
introduced this idea of the fitness
landscape so as a population is uh
experiencing genetic change over
Evolution that cloud of points is moving
horizontally in the fitness landscape
and if the Fitness of those individuals
is generally going up that's them
climbing a slope in their Fitness
landscape the fitness landscape is sort
of this metaphorical mathematical
landscape that helps us visualize or
think about evolution in a
co-evolutionary process we no longer
have a fitness landscape because the
height of Peaks or the depths of troughs
do not stay constant over time as the
fitness of predators goes up the fitness
of prey goes down as the fitness of prey
goes up the fitness of predators goes
down and you have a fitness sea now you
have waves that are going up and down
that's
co-evolution there are co-evolutionary
robotics experiments in which we have
two sets of evolving populations
competing against one another we'll see
this in about uh towards the end of the
course in about two weeks from now today
we're not looking at co-evolution we're
looking at a version of kin selection
the behaviors of the Lions are Going to
evolve we're going to fix the behavior
of the
gazelle uh good question didn't we see
coevolution already when we were seeing
co-evolution of the simulators and the
and the robot
behaviors yes yes you're right in a in a
way that's a form of co-evolution we
have a population of simulations and a
population of controllers it's kind of
co-evolution we're going to see a
cleaner more obvious version of this in
two weeks when there's two populations
of robots competing against one
another okay
okay all right oh I already mentioned
this so the Savannah is
toroidal but obviously I'm not going to
draw this as toyid we're going to look
at two-dimensional uh we're going to
look at two- dimensional images okay
let's talk about the behavior of the
gazelle first first this is fixed this
this is the behavior of the gazelle B is
a is stand for Behavior it's a two it's
a vector of length two this length two
Vector dictates how the X and Y
coordinates of the gazelle is going to
change from the current time time T to
its new position at TT + one so you can
think of b as an an arrow that is
pointing out of the gazelle at time T
and it's pointing in the direction in
which the gazelle is about to move at
the next time
step okay so what is how do we compute
this Vector for the gazelle at each time
step it's a sum over a whole bunch of
vectors that are taken from a set of
vectors and these vectors are the
vectors that connect the gazelle to each
lion so we're going to sum up over four
vectors we're going to sum these four
vectors together and use that to compute
the new uh heading of the
gazelle why the minus sign in front of
the summation
symbol absolutely right look where all
the lions are in general take the
average of all of those vectors and head
in the opposite direction
very simple but probably a pretty good
thing to do you'll notice that this is a
weighted sum each time we add a vector
to the sum before we negate it we divide
by the length of that
Vector why this is a slightly smarter
thing for the gazelle to do the gazelle
could simply take the average of its uh
distances or and and directions from the
Lion's and head in the opposite
direction it's not what the gazelle does
it takes the weighted Su
why absolutely so in my little cartoon
visualization here L1 is the closest
lion which means the magnitude of this
Vector is the least magnitude among
these four magnitudes so when we divide
by that least magnitude that magnifies
the influence of this
Vector on the direction in which the
gazelle moves everybody see that okay so
to sum up the math here at every time
step the gazelle is going to sense all
of the Predators and react most strongly
to the ones that are closer to
it okay let me just back up for I'll
leave that up there actually there's one
more uh normalization term here which is
we're computing Max
here Max
what what's W and H here do you
think
Max it's not the max distance it could
move
kind
of it's not the boundary conditions
because there are no boundaries on the
too in the toid but you're getting close
what does w and h stand for do you
think width and height it's the width
and height of the rectangle before it's
turned into a toid so it's a little
confusing we're dealing with the
toid we take the width and height
and then we take the Pythagorean
distance of the diagonal of half
that so here's here's half W half the
width of this sheet and here's half the
height of the sheet and
here's Max this is the
length of the
diagonal Max what
very close the maximum distance not that
necessarily can
see it's the it's the furthest the
gazelle can possibly be from a lion on
the toroid right it's hard to think
about distances on a toroid if we were
to put the gazelle and the lion forget
get four Lions just one lion we put the
gazelle and the lion at any two points
on the toroid how far can they possibly
be from one another it's this it's Max
so what we're actually doing if you
think about it in this cartoon this
carton is
wrong this is not the distance that
connects the gazelle to L4 you can
probably tell by eye the length of this
Vector is longer than
Max so that's not really L4 is actually
closer to the gazelle on the toroid than
it looks from this Vector here yeah it's
actually probably something like up
Northwest of the gazelle and wrapped
around and L4 is actually quite close to
the gazelle so we're normalizing by this
term based on dist es on the
toid just just a reminder that we're not
dealing with a sheet we're dealing with
a toid but this is the most important
thing for our purposes move away from
the Lions and wait your decision based
on who's
closest the length of the vector that
connects right length of the gazelle
lion Vector let's say yeah absolute
absolutely it does so there's a little
bit of normalization here but for our
purposes just a reminder we're dealing
with the Tor so far so good okay let's
keep going okay that's the gazelle
relatively straightforward the behavior
of the Lions not so straightforward
we'll spend a couple minutes on this
slide uh let's go to the title of this
paper for a moment evolving teamwork so
obviously we're going to be evolving
teamwork for the Lions and coordination
among Ong the Lions they're going to
actually the lions are actually going to
coordinate their behavior to try and
bring down the gazelle using genetic
programming and we saw genetic
programming way back at the beginning of
the course when we were surveying
different kinds of evolutionary
algorithms an evolutionary algorithm is
the umbrella
term evolutionary algorithms is the
umbrella term for a whole bunch of
different kinds of evolutionary
algorithms you've implemented a genetic
algorithm in your in your projects
arguably a parallel hill climber is a
type of evolutionary
algorithm we talked briefly about
genetic programming that's distinct from
other kinds of evolutionary algorithms
for a particular reason anybody remember
what made genetic programming
distinct that the one that enes the
absolutely which is exactly what we're
going to do here so in gene in genetic
algorithms like in your code the data
structure uh the data structure that
encodes the behavior of the robot or
codes the phenotype is usually a vector
in your case it's a vector that encodes
the synaptic weights for the neural
networ that drives the behavior of the
robot so the behavior of the robot is
the phenotype and the Gen and the
genotype is a vector of Weights in
genetic programming no matter what the
phenotype is the data structure for
storing the DNA or the
genotype is a tree we're going to be
using genetic programming we're going to
see genetic programming being used in
this experiment so if you were to look
inside the heads of the of the Lions you
wouldn't see vectors or neural networks
you would see trees we're going to use
trees to evolve the behavior of the
Lions okay what exactly do these trees
look
like as you mentioned we're going to
start by building a random tree for each
Lion in each Pride we're going to be
evolving populations of things what are
the things we're going to be evolving
we're going to be evolving behaviors for
uh Pride a pride of lions and we're
going to have a tree that encodes the
behavior for each lion so inside each of
the four Lions there's going to be one
of these trees to start an evolutionary
algorithm we usually start with random
genotypes in your case random vectors of
floating Point values in our case we
need to start by creating a random tree
as you mentioned I used this metaphor at
the beginning of the class of having a
bag of operators and operand the things
that we can use to build a tree the
building blocks if you like this is the
list of operators and operand that we
can use to build the behaviors for our
Lions the oper the
operand have zero arguments associated
with them and all of the operators here
have more than zero arguments associated
with them so here's some familiar
operators plus and minus here's some
slightly less obvious operators we'll
talk about these in a moment so let's
imagine we take these three operand put
them in our bag and these 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
8 nine operators uh operators also put
them in the bag we have a total of three
things three operands nine operators we
shake up the bag and then we reach into
the bag and pull out one of these 12
things at random and let's assume by
chance I happen to pull out this operand
called
last and I put that in the top of my
empty
tree I I happen to grab an operand
rather an operator that operand has zero
arguments so there's nothing that last
need to execute it doesn't need any
arguments it's done it's happy so we're
done building a tree we just built a
tree at random it's a one node tree we
take this one node tree and drop it into
the head of lion one we also drop it
into the head of L2 drop it into the
head of L3 and drop it into the head of
L4 so far so good okay we take we're
going to now simulate our swarm our
swarm of lions our pride of lions so we
take G the gazelle and drop it at some
random position on the toroid take each
of the four lions that have this in
their head and drop those four Lions
also at random positions on the toroid
and start the simulation we turn the
simulation on the gazelle looks at all
the other
lions and in indicates that at the next
time step it wants to move in Direction
B so far so
good what direction do all four Lions
want to move
in each of the four lions at this first
time step in the simulation execute this
function what do the Lions want to do at
the next time step
they want to go in the direction that
they moved at the last time step but
it's time Step Zero they don't have they
didn't move in a direction at the last
time step so on the first move of the
first time step this function returns a
random Vector so all the lions move in a
random Direction the gazelle moves away
from them and at the second time step of
the simul the gazelle looks again at all
the four lions and heads in the opposite
direction what do the four Lions
do Emily they just keep running they
keep running in the direction that they
ran at ran in at the last time step how
do you think this particular pride of
lions does at Bringing Down the gazelle
probably not very well right so whatever
the we're going to calculate the fitness
at the end of the simul
and I don't remember if they mention
it I think they I think they updated the
simulation 15 times I think there were
15 time steps in the simulation so at
the 15th time step you can imagine that
the distance between G and the closest L
was quite large we set the fitness of
all four lions or we set the fitness of
this thing to one over that distance the
larger this distance the lower the
fitness of this lion pride Behavior so
far so good okay we're running genetic
programming so we've just evaluated the
fitness of the first uh behavior for the
pride of lions in the population but
remember in an evolutionary algorithm
we're always evolving a population of
things so we go to the next tree random
tree in the population we don't have
that tree yet so we've got to construct
this second tree in the population at
random so we throw last back in back
into the bag we shake it up and in this
case let's assume that we by chance
happen to pull out the addition operator
the addition operator takes two
arguments so we need to now randomly
construct the two arguments that are
supplied to plus let's assume uh let's
assume that I pull out Rand now from the
bag and this one takes one argument so I
need to fill something in here let's say
I pull out from the bag at random the
gazelle operand and over here I pull out
the random Direction
[Music]
Rand Rand dur operand I have a second
random
tree I reset the position of G and the
four Lions I drop them at five different
random positions on the surface of the
toroid make four copies of this and drop
a copy of this into the heads of each of
the four lions and then start the
simulation again what do the Lions do in
this
case we've got to evaluate this tree
inside the head of the first of the four
Lions roughly in the direction of the
gazelle roughly in the direction of the
gazelle all right let's see let's visit
gazelle down here this is an operand
that returns a vector from The Lion to
the gazelle so I'm L1 I've got a
particular Vector that connects me to
the gazelle
this node returns this Vector this
Vector gets supplied to this function
random this is a function that acts on
vectors all of the operators here are
vector
operations you know so this Vector
operation
randomizes the magnitude
of the original Vector so maybe Rand
makes this Vector a little bit shorter
by chance could have also made it longer
same direction but slightly different
magnitude
this operand over here returns as you
would imagine some random
vector and then this Vector operation
sums these two vectors which actually
gives a very very small
Vector looks like to me yeah this this
is the direction that L1 moves in we
take this exact same tree and we now
evaluate it for
L2 the second lion does this identical
tree that's in the head of the second
lion does it return exactly the same
vector or a different
Vector I see most of you shaking your
heads no right
this is
different yeah it's different for the
different Lions so they're all running
exactly the same strategy in their heads
but the Lions can behave differently not
unlike what we saw with the boyss right
they're all running exactly the same
program but produce different
Behavior so far so good okay let's say
by chance we apply the exact same we
apply apply the exact same Fitness
function to this pride of
lions and maybe they do a little bit
better than this pride of lions this one
was pretty poor maybe this one does a
little bit
better we evaluate the third tree or we
evaluate the behavior of the third Pride
running the third tree we evaluate the
behavior of the fourth Pride uh running
the fourth random tree and so on in our
population of
100 random trees which is 100 random
behaviors for lion Prides what do you
think we do as we move from this first
generation of genetic programming to the
Next Generation have a question
sure you say like a random tree do if
you encounter like tree number three in
the same as tree number
97 great question so what happens by
chance if
there happens to be by chance this tree
in the population as well does it get
exactly the same
Fitness why
not we started we start every simulation
with different random initial conditions
which are the initial positions of the
lion so maybe
not but this is still a pretty crappy
solution so it's probably Al Al going to
be low right so even if we have
identical genotypes in the population we
don't necessarily get identical
phenotypes which in this case is the
behavior of the pride and therefore
these two genotypes do not necessarily
get identical Fitness values identical
twins here in the real world don't
necessarily always have the same number
of offspring that are equally successful
right just because you get the same
genetic role of the dice doesn't
necessarily mean you're going to have
the same outcome in life but assuming
that your genome dictates more or less
your chance evolutionary chances uh in
this world you're going to get similar
values over in general so far so good
okay all right so we finished designing
a fitness value to every pride of lions
and we're going to move on to generation
two how do we move from generation one
to generation two what do we need to do
which is what we've done in every
evolutionary algorithm we've seen so
far I'm picking up my Eraser this is a
strong
hint delete the ones that have low
Fitness and make randomly modified
copies of the
survivors when we talked about genetic
programming what does randomly modified
copies look like if this is the child
that I just produced from this parent
it's identical to the parent we choose a
node at
random we delete what's in there we
reach back into our bag of three
operands and nine operators Shake It Up
and pull something else out like for
example uh if do
product this one is a little more
complicated it takes 1 2 3 4
arguments I'm getting a little bit lazy
here so instead of putting actual
operators and operands here I'm just
going to put Vector one vector 2 Vector
3 and Vector 4 because in this form of
genetic programming every node in every
tree always returns a vector right these
are all vector operands and operations
so let's assume in my cartoon example
here these are the vectors that these
four nodes return for one Lion at one
time step in the simulation what does
the dot product what does this
particular Vector operation
do evaluate the first and second
arguments okay we've done that we've
evaluated the first and second arguments
so we have two vectors in hand if
they're dot product okay pause take the
dot product between these two vectors if
the dot product of these two vectors is
greater than or equal to zero and let's
assume in my cartoon example here that
the dot product between these two
vectors is greater than
zero then evaluate and return the third
argument so we take this vector and
return
it if the dot product between these two
vectors have been less than zero then we
return the
vector returned by the fourth argument
up to this
node everybody see that it's just
another Vector
operation okay all right all right so
that's how we can construct and
evolve behaviors for a pride of lions
it's hard to to hold all this in your
head let's try and construct from
scratch a behavior for a single
lion you're the lion you're very hungry
you're motivated to pick carefully from
this
set what do you do
bad right you're really hungry you don't
have a lot of time to think head for the
gazelle I'm sorry I forgot to mention a
little detail here which is going to be
important for you as a hungry lion the
gazelle at every point in time travels
three units or three length
units it travels three length units in
this direction
the
Lions I hope it says it here oh yeah the
Lions only travel one
unit not unlike our actual lion right
gazel in real life and on our virtual
serengetti travel faster than the lion
chasing the the gazelle seems like a
good thing to do the gazelle is
Overjoyed that you have chosen this
strategy it can easily evade you this
ain't going to cut it
other
ideas
okay not so easy is
it it's a trick question there there is
nothing really you can do if you're if
you're on a perfectly infinite perfectly
flat plane and your competitor can run
three times as fast as you can what can
you possibly do right not much so the
investigators in this case have kind of
created a non-level playing field here
no pun intended in favor of the gazelle
if there's one lion if there's four
Lions suddenly there's more opportunity
for the lion pride everybody see that
it's not clear what that opportunity is
but there probably is something that
they can do as a group that's beyond the
ability of any one
lion
okay let's have a look they're going to
as we just said they're going to run
genetic programming and evolve these
trees for four lions and see over
evolutionary time how well does the lion
Prides how well do the lion Prides
evolve to bring down the gazelle that's
experiment one or experiment a we spent
some time last week talking about AB
testing creating two similar algorithms
and then comparing how well they do
consider this algorithm
a this is algorithm B it looks and acts
exactly like algorithm a we're going to
use genetic programming we're going to
encode the behaviors of lions as sets of
vector operations but we're going to
throw four
additional operand into the bag the
thing that we can construct the
behaviors for Lions let's have a look at
them one of these operand remember
they're all Vector operands is a vector
that uh starts at the lion nearest the
gazelle and connects to the gazelle so
in this case it's probably this Vector
that starts at L1 and points to the
gazelle
the second one vector Opera we're going
to look at is that the the lion pride is
going to have available to it is a
vector from The Lion that's running this
tree in its head I'm lion I that
connects me to my nearest lion so I have
access to this
Vector our lion means right hand lion so
I'm a lion and I'm heading in this
direction or I was heading in this
direction at time T I'm Computing my new
heading I need a new Vector at time t +
one our line is going to return the
vector that connects me to the lion
that's immediately on my right if I
start doing a clockwise sweep from the
direction in which I headed last the
first lion that I hit in my clockwise
sweep that's the lion that's immediately
on my right if I if I hit this node in
my behavior tree L lion I do the same
thing I take the direction that I was
heading in uh last time step and I start
a counterclockwise sweep and th this
operand now returns a vector that
connects me to the lion that's
immediately on my left yeah my left my
right my distance to the gazelle this is
things from the Lion's point of view the
lion am that's
running that's running this tree in its
head when I'm sensing the world and I'm
interpreting my sensation relative to me
on my right on my left that's known as
dietic
sensing when you're having a
conversation with someone and you talk
about the person that's on your left or
your right that's you communicating the
results of you interpreting your
sensation
dietic what's actually coming in is
obviously just Blobs of color and motion
and light and dark you interpret that as
things out there in the world and then
as a last step you may interpret those
things out there in the world relative
to
yourself we've actually seen this
concept before this idea of thinking or
reasoning about objects and things and
people out in the world relative to
yourself where did we see this concept
pop up
before minim the minimal cognition
experiments yes what specifically in the
minimal what phenomenon in the minimal
cognition experiments was it what was
the name for this thing about reasoning
about how I relate to things in the
world the robot that see the motion of
arm
or uh Rel like that it they are moved or
whatever kind of but not quite related
to this concept that I'm fishing
forces affordances
right how do we know that a chair is a
chair in kindergarten we're taught that
a chair has four
legs this one doesn't it's got five legs
those have four legs it's not really so
much about the geometry of things out
there in the world it's how we relate to
to them as these lions are pounding uh
along the virtual serengetti plane they
are sensing or they can sense other
things out there they can sense G the
gazelle and they can now sense my
leftmost lion my rightmost lion things
that are relative to themselves this is
dietic sensing so in algorithm B we're
going to construct random trees but
we're now going to pull operands and
operators out of a bag that contains not
12 items but 13 14 15 16 items so the
evolutionary algorithm has additional
options it can build or evolve behaviors
for the pride that incorporate dicc
sensing if it's helpful to the pride if
not evolution is going to
delete is going to delete trees that
contain dietic sensing and evolution is
quote unquote choose not to use it it's
not helpful so in algorithm B the
investigators are in essence asking a
research question if we want to evolve
Collective behavior for robots is it
helpful for them if they're doing
something collectively to deter to
determine what to do based on dietic
sensing or
not everybody see that so
far okay that's
variant B third and final uh algorithm
variant is variant
C where they're going to take the base
set they're going to take the 12 items
in the bag and throw in a 13th 14th 15th
and 16th item and run genetic
programming again evolve behaviors for
the pride exactly the same Fitness
function everything else is exactly the
same in this case evolution has the
option to construct behaviors for the
Lions using name based
sensing good question why is this any
different from dietic sensing let's have
a look at these four Vector operand as
always these new operand return a
vector in this case L1 returns a vector
that emanates from me the current lion
that's running this to Lion
one every time I move that Vector
changes like most likely changes because
my position relative to L1 probably
changes let's just check in with our
intuition that we understand what's
going on imagine all four lions are
running this
program how does this pride of lions
move towards Lions one and two what
happens if you are lion one or two
toward each other go towards each other
let's start with an even simpler one
this tree let's take this tree and drop
it into the heads of all four lions and
turn on the
simulation what is L1 what does actually
lion one do when L1 runs this in its
head stay still stays still right when
L1 executes this
program it returns this Vector when any
of the other three lions run this
program it Returns the vector that
connects them to L1 everybody see that
okay so back to Abby's question about
what is the difference between name
based sensing and dietic
sensing anybody have any ideas if you're
evolving behaviors for a lion pride
using this stuff what kinds of behaviors
might you get compared to evolving
behaviors for the lion pride using this
stuff
more
like not one single
lead could be could be getting close
right think about any team sports that
you've ever
played what depending on the sport it
matters what sort of makes sense some
sports you rely on who's on your right
who's on your left who's in your field
of view who can't you see so you
therefore know are behind you that's
dietic sensing right versus I'm paying
attention to number 14 or I'm basing
what I do based on the person who's
playing front forward I'm not much of a
sports person so you have to forgive my
sports references here right I'm G to
pay attention to what the go the other
players goalie is doing and not worry
too much about what everyone else is
doing that's name-based sensing maybe
not name but there's a specific player
or individual on the team or on the
other team that you're paying attention
to what different kinds of strategies
does this give rise to as you pointed
out one one thing you tend to get in
dietic sensing is similar Behavior
within the group which means they're all
kind of doing the same thing not
necessarily executing exactly the same
change in position at every time step
but doing generally the same thing
that's generally less true in name based
s
in I
mean already
mentioned I would imagine this would
rise TOS where individual would have
their own set position
they their own set position that they
play and like Ian the role role within
the team okay now we've entered new
territory in our uh in our study of
collective intelligence what is this
phenomenon that we're talking about now
we've heard several different synonyms
for
it specialization division of
labor for various reasons I'm the one
that usually comes in and stands up here
and does all the talking it's not me one
day and then you the next day there are
classes like that but that's not this
class right for certain under certain
circumstances it makes sense for certain
people to specialize to do certain
things and others to do other things
when we're trying to do something as a
group like trying to keep the
civilization running some people teach
some people learn and then those rules
switch division of labor if you look
across the animal kingdom and you look
at various species that attempt uh
Collective Behavior like us and many uh
insects in some cases you do see
division of labor and some cases you
don't it gets complicated sometimes it's
helpful sometimes it doesn't I haven't
shown you the results of of of algorithm
c b or a yet what do you
think do you think group think or sort
of the starlings approach where there's
sort of a cloud of similar Behavior
going on within the pride is that a good
thing to do or does it make sense
for some of the Lions to specialize
here that's the question so it's
possible that Evolution could evolve
specialization among the Lions do you
think it makes sense in this task four
lions running on the surface of a donut
trying to bring down a gazelle
could be could be right maybe it makes
sense it's not possible to hide on this
troid because there's no obstacles but
but ambushing sneaking up on maybe maybe
I don't know about you but when I first
came across this study before I actually
read the results I wasn't I wasn't sure
I I put my money on the fact that this
was wasn't the way to do it this wasn't
sufficient the Lions didn't have enough
information to coordinate Behavior but
it wasn't clear to me whether these
lions were going to evolve to be better
at Collective hunting than these
Lions let's see okay before we look at
results there's one other Wrinkle In
This experiment we need to deal with
which comes back to this issue about
group fitness as I mentioned within this
pop within the population of genetic
programming we' got a population of 100
trees each tree is going to control the
behavior of four Lions the most obvious
way to do this is to take each tree out
of the GP population out of the genetic
programming population and clone that
tree three times so we have four
identical copies of those trees and drop
those four uh clones into the four lions
and off they go that's the easiest thing
to do
but there's other things we could do
like for example this which
is when we create a tree in the
population we actually at the root
create an empty
node and then create four trees B below
and then we start filling in these nodes
by reaching into this bag at random what
this does is it sort of simplifies our
life because there's now one tree for
the entire
Pride the first subtree down here
dictates how L1 is going to move the
second subtree dictates how L2 is going
to move and so on what's the potential
benefit of encoding the behaviors of the
lions like this then like this
exactly right here it's kind it's even
with name based sensing and dietic
sensing it might be hard for the Lions
to specialize if it does make sense for
one lion to go to be offense and the
other three to be defense or flushers or
whatever it is hard maybe to evolve it
so let's evolve this but if we have a
population of trees that look like this
here's one random tree in the population
here's a second random tree in the
population here's a third random
tree assuming by chance these three
trees survived their respective Prides
did relatively well at Bringing Down the
gazelle how do we make children from
these we could make a randomly modified
copy of each we could treat these as
three parents and make one child from
each of these three parents or we could
try and combine
behaviors from
different parents so this is sort of an
odd form of sexual recombination we're
going to create one child one strategy
for one Pride that combines strategies
of individual lions from the three
different parental
genotypes everybody see
that for those that right for those that
remember neat this is a little bit like
the neat
algorithm it's also inherits one of the
problems the problem that neat was
designed to
solve checking your short-term memory
here what was the problem neat was
designed to
solve
comb the data itself the data itself
you're you're combining clumps of data
but you're taking them out of context
maybe L1 which is actually uh which is
actually donating Its Behavior into this
Pride maybe L1 actually did do very well
maybe L1 was actually the lion that
brought down the gazelle in this
parental Pride but it only did so with
the support of its siblings L2 L3 and L4
and so the behavior for L1 has now
become the behavior for L2 in this new
Pride but l too is surrounded by
different differently behaving Partners
it's kind of lost that behavior this is
another form of the competing
conventions problem comes up a lot in
machine learning in general right we're
sort of combining useful stuff into a
new algorithm this algorithm over here
the behavior for the pride but taken out
of context so the idea was kind of cool
let's allow special ization to make it
easier for specialization to evolve in
this Pride but we got the competing
competing conventions
problem the investigators realized that
and they made a little bit of a tweak to
this which they called restricted
breeding which is L1 could only donate
Behavior to another one to an L1 in a
child Pride we're still L1 the the new
L1 is still working inide of Pride with
an L2 from another parent so it's not
great but l1s donate their genetic
material to other l1s and l3s only
donate their genetic material to l3s so
over evolutionary time it looks like the
evolution of specialization might be
easier in restricted breeding compared
to these two algorithm variants
so far so good okay so again we got a
lot of moving pieces here we have
algorithm a b and
c and we now have three different ways
of propagating genetic information from
one generation to the next we'll call
these variants X Y and
Z we can combine these things ax a y a z
BX b y y b z CX Cy CZ which gives us
nine algorithm
variance why would free breeding be
better at
specialization up
here allows more specialization than
cloning so in cloning the Lions can
still move differently but very
difficult for them to actually over
evolutionary time evolve a specialized
Behavior right you can really see it in
restricted breeding you could imagine L1
over evolutionary time from child to
child to child to child L1 gets better
and better and better at sneaking up on
the gazelle based on what its other
three partners are doing and L2 L3 and
L4 get really good at sneaking up
indirectly around the gazelle you could
imagine specialization starting to
evolve more easily in restricted
breeding than the other two yeah Okay so
we've got nine algorithm variants for
each of those nine algorithm variance
they're going to do 100 evolutionary
runs they're going to evolve Prides of
lions 100 times they want to see on
average for all of the three different
algorithm variants a B and C and the
three different ways of
constructing the Prides X Y and Z on
average how well do the Prides evolve to
bring down the gazelle as if that's not
complicated enough they introduced
variant
101 and
12 okay what are 1011 and 12 they're
just simpler versions of the algorithm
these are known as the controls
these are sort of
Baseline how well on average can the
algorithm do and then how well do these
nine algorithm variants improve on these
simpler ways of doing things algorithm
uh variant 10 here just evolve one lion
as we've already seen it's probably not
going to do very well but let's run this
uh this algorithm 100 times and see how
well one lion evolves to bring bring
down the gazelle Let's uh execute 100
simulations in which there's just a
randomly moving
lion and let's run a 100 simulations in
which there are four randomly moving
Lions these are the three
controls for these three controls we're
going to get back floating Point numbers
how well on average a single evolved
lion got to the gazelle how well a
single randomly move moving lion got to
the gazelle and how well four randomly
moving lions got to the gazelle that's
going to give us a basine what is that
distance actually mean and then do any
of these nine variants evolve lions that
get closer to the gazelle than this
that's why it's called a control right
we're controlling our expectations here
how how much better can we
do okay these are details uh details of
the evolutionary Alm we're running short
on time I don't think we need these okay
apologies that's a long leadup to the
results they don't look fancy no fancy
graphs here we're just going to uh look
at the Matrix
directly let's look at the three
controls down here here's the one
evolved Lion on average the random lion
uh the evolved lion gets seven length
units away from the
gazelle I won't go back and show you the
visualization that's about as bad as you
can do that's the gazelle showing off
the gazelle is about as far from the
single evolved lion as the gazelle can
possibly get on the toroid so evolving
behavior for a single lion does
nothing you'll see that this number is
not that different from this number one
random ly moving lion gets about as
close to the gazelle as one evolved lion
does so how bad can things get this bad
this number we're starting to calibrate
our understanding of what these length
units mean on the toroid if we put four
random Lions on the toroid and have them
move at random they do
better how how can four randomly moving
Lions do better than one randomly moving
lion the gazelle's always moving
away cover more space they just cover
more space right the Lions they're
moving randomly so they're spread out
more or less across the toroid so the
gazelle can't help but being a little
bit closer to one of
them so as long as there are four Lions
on the donut we want to see whether any
of our nine algorithm variants can do
better than
4.41 get closer than 4.41 units away
from the gazelle yeah okay here's our 1
two three four five six 78 n results
from our nine algorithm variance the
immediate thing that should jump out to
you about all nine numbers
is they're better than random they're
better so evolving behaviors for four
Lions
using this set this set this set or
evolving them like this or like this or
like this any combination or permutation
of these things does better so we
already have a conclusion to the title
of the paper which is yes we can evolve
teamwork and coordination among a group
of admittedly simple robots acting
together first uh first conclusion from
the set of results okay all right among
all the nine algorithm variants here
which one did the
best restricted name based restricted
okay so let's go and look at name
based so name based is when the Lions
actually uh modulate their behavior
based on actual other Lions I'm going to
do what I do based on what L2 is doing
not based on what the rightmost lion in
my line of sight is doing so evolving
specialization
helps and name-based restricted breeding
this form of breeding down here produces
the best so again this is an early study
no YouTube videos I'm afraid we can't
actually see the behavior of the Lions
of what they're doing but you should be
able to conclude from the fact that this
number is the lowest number among these
set of nine
numbers generally what's going on
generally what is going
on what are the Prides of lions evolving
to do in this particular algorithm
variant absolutely right what however
this pride is bringing down the gazelle
there is the Evolve the evolution of
specialization and sorry specialization
and different
differentiation and coordination right
that's the name-based sensing part it's
not one of them saying listen I'll go
get the gazelle the three of you just do
whatever you want I don't care it
doesn't matter right that's not
coordination that's not teamwork there
is specialization and coordination going
on here
somehow
best G's pretty fast right the best that
any lion ever did in all of these
experiments was get almost there it
grazed the back hoof of the gazelle
right these Lions still go hungry the
investigators made things really hard on
the Lions the gazel travel at every time
step three times faster than the Lions
this is a tough task yeah okay
uh I think we're going to leave question
number three here again in the interest
of time we're a little bit behind I'll
leave this for you to think about so in
this early study this was basically a
proof of concept about how how you could
recruit evolutionary algorithms to
evolve Collective behavior for
autonomous machines hopefully we don't
want to evolve Collective behavior for
machines to actually do group hunting
but if you wanted to you can the the
other interesting Fallout from this
study was there are particular ways to
evolve Collective behavior for machines
that are better ways than others and
interestingly it kind of makes sense
from what we see in nature for better
for worse for humans that are trying to
coordinate the actions of eight or nine
billion members we tend to have
specialization we haven't yet figured
out how to act like starlings and
coordinate our Behavior with no real
specialization as the starlings show us
it is possible to coordinate Action
Group action with not a lot of
specialization of behavior but at least
in our species in many of insect
population in many insect species and in
these virtual lion populations Evolution
opts for or decides to evolve
specialization teamwork
coordination okay specialization
teamwork coordination are
great but there's still more that you
can do as a team we've got these lions
running around and they're looking at
what L1 L2 and L3 are
doing that's
coordination but they still went
hungry what else could we give the lions
that would give them a little bit of an
edge that would facilitate their ability
to evolve coordinated action
communication right humans can do a lot
when you're doing a group sport you're
usually running and you're out of breath
you don't have the ability to actually
communicate we do a lot of this implicit
coordination I infer what my teammates
are about to do based on what they're
currently doing based on my memory of
what they've done before but even though
I'm out of breath often you'll see pro
athletes signaling to each other as
they're working right there's a real
strong
pressure if you want to coordinate
complex actions in a large group to
explicitly communicate information we
only have two minutes left so I'm just
going to introduce the second
study the second study in our study of
collective robotics in which we're again
going to look at an evolutionary
algorithm that evolves uh that evolves
Cooperative action in a group but also
allows the individuals to evolve commun
iation and possibly verging on
language let's see
okay we're doing things not
chronologically uh at the moment we're
going even further back in time to 1991
this is a very very old study I love it
it's a classic okay the evolution the
title says it all the evolution of
communication we're back to pre physics
engine uh world so uh uh worlds so again
we're going to look at a donut this is a
discrete donut so we've got a donut and
it's divided up with grid paper so we've
got a whole bunch of unique grid points
we've got a total of 200x 200 or 40,000
empty squares on this toid and instead
of four lions in this case we're going
to have
1600 agents and at the beginning of
every simulation that you see here we're
going to drop these 1600 agents into
some of these empty
squares and a new Twist on an
evolutionary robotics experiment
actually an old twist but for us new
that we haven't seen before these
individuals are gendered 800 female
agents 800 male
agents they have different abilities to
sense think and act
we'll leave things there for now you
have a quiz due tonight you're working
uh you're going to start working on your
third weekly report see you all on
Thursday thanks